---
layout: post
title: Week 14 - Algorithms and AI
---

## Algorithms and AI videos

### How Computer Memory works

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/p3q5zWCw8J4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>  

### The math of online dating  
<div style="max-width:854px"><div style="position:relative;height:0;padding-bottom:56.25%"><iframe src="https://embed.ted.com/talks/lang/en/christian_rudder_inside_okcupid_the_math_of_online_dating" width="854" height="480" style="position:absolute;left:0;top:0;width:100%;height:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" allowfullscreen></iframe></div></div>

### Intro to Machine Learning  
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/z-EtmaFJieY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Final Exam

**Online Monday December 12, NOON (12-2:30pm)**

This is an *open book exam*. You may use your notes from class, the class website and Moodle, the Processing website, and our class textbook, but you may not use other online resources or consult with other students.

The final will be a similar type exam to our midterm, with short answers, longer questions, and a few coding problems.

# Final Project 

**Due Wednesday December 14 at 5pm**

 
## Your final project should have a separate document page with the following

1. Final Project title
2. 1 paragraph description
3. 1 page about your project
 - What was your approach or strategy did you take in creating your project?
 - How does someone use your software?
 - What libraries, tools or other resources did you use, if any?
 - Notes about challenges when working on the projects. What barriers did you run into and how did you solve it?
4. Include your weekly log files. 
5. Include at least 3 screenshots of your project running, including opening screen, while the program is running, and potentially a final page. Add your help page or any other pages.

## Your code must:

- be clear and organized
- use comments to make sections and particular parts of your code clear
- work without bugs
- work properly in fullscreen

## Your final project design must:

- Be a compelling and interesting program made with code
- Properly cite any code that you found and used online
- Create a compelling interactive work synthesizing both concept and technical execution
- Have an **info** page,  which could be on a landing page/start page, or be a separate page
- Have **clear indicated instructions** for interaction (visual keys or a help/info page)
- Have a way to reset and start the sketch over again

### Homework

1. Write out in pseudocode the flow of your program. If it helps, draw a flowchart that shows your software and any interactivity. What happens first? What happens next, and in what order? Where do branching choices occur?
2. What questions do you have? What are you concerned about?
3. What are the next steps for you to take?
