---
layout: post
title: Week 15 - Wrapping it up
---

Today:

* What have we covered this semester?
* Feedback for the professor
* Tips for future students
* What questions still remain?
* Prep for exam
* 1-on-1 time to work on final project

## What have we learned in this course?: Review

[Syllabus](https://leetusman.com/cs1_fall2022/pages/syllabus)

### Course Goals / Learning Outcomes

The course goals and learning outcomes are my promise to you for what you will learn in this course. Did I hit it?

* Students will have a cohesive knowledge of the foundational components of programming languages and be able to apply this knowledge
* Students will have the ability to program software in Processing, starting from the concept stage and being able to translate this to software sketches
* Students will have an understanding of the process of debugging and be able to use this knowledge to solve programming problems with their code
* Students will have an understanding of the process of translating concepts to code and to refining one's work through iteration

## Feedback for the professor

What worked well this semester?

What could be improved when I teach this course next time?

## Tips for future students

[Anonymously written tips for future students of the course](https://board.net/p/cs1_tips_for_future_students)

## Final Exam

**Online Monday December 12, NOON (12-2:30pm)**

This is an *open book exam*. You may use your notes from class, the class website and Moodle, the Processing website, and our class textbook, but you may not use other online resources or consult with other students.

The final will be a similar type exam to our midterm, with short answers, longer questions, and a few coding problems.

# Final Project 

**Due Wednesday December 14 at 5pm**

 
## Your final project should have a separate document page with the following

1. Final Project title
2. 1 paragraph description
3. 1 page about your project
 - What was your approach or strategy did you take in creating your project?
 - How does someone use your software?
 - What libraries, tools or other resources did you use, if any?
 - Notes about challenges when working on the projects. What barriers did you run into and how did you solve it?
4. Include your weekly log files. 
5. Include at least 3 screenshots of your project running, including opening screen, while the program is running, and potentially a final page. Add your help page or any other pages.

## Your code must:

- be clear and organized
- use comments to make sections and particular parts of your code clear
- work without bugs
- work properly in fullscreen

## Your final project design must:

- Be a compelling and interesting program made with code
- Properly cite any code that you found and used online
- Create a compelling interactive work synthesizing both concept and technical execution
- Have an **info** page,  which could be on a landing page/start page, or be a separate page
- Have **clear indicated instructions** for interaction (visual keys or a help/info page)
- Have a way to reset and start the sketch over again

